AMDGPU: Preliminary documentation for named barriers (#165502)
llvm/llvm-project: llvm/docs/AMDGPUUsage.rst

allocation scope matches that of global variables in LDS. Programs in LLVM IR
refer to named barriers using pointers.

The following named barrier types are supported in global variables, defined
recursively:

* a single, standalone ``target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)``
* an array of supported types
* a struct containing a single element of supported type

.. code-block:: llvm

      @bar = addrspace(3) global target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0) undef
      @foo = addrspace(3) global [2 x target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)] undef
      @baz = addrspace(3) global { target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0) } undef

      ...

      %foo.i = getelementptr [2 x target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)], ptr addrspace(3) @foo, i32 0, i32 %i
      call void @llvm.amdgcn.s.barrier.signal.var(ptr addrspace(3) %foo.i, i32 0)

Named barrier types may not be used in ``alloca``.

Named barriers do not have an underlying byte representation.
It is undefined behavior to use a pointer to any part of a named barrier object
as the pointer operand of a regular memory access instruction or intrinsic.
Pointers to named barrier objects are intended to be used with dedicated

> intrinsics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pointers to named barrier objects are intended to be used with dedicated
intrinsics. Reading from or writing to such pointers is undefined behavior.
```

                             other operations within the same address space.
     ======================= ===================================================

Target Types
------------

The AMDGPU backend implements some target extension types.

.. _amdgpu-types-named-barriers:

Named Barriers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Named barriers are represented as memory objects of type

> ``target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)``. They are allocated as global variables

Author: I think we need to be consistent about whether internal implementation details are mentioned here or not.

in the LDS address space. They do not occupy regular LDS memory, but their
lifetime and allocation granularity matches that of global variables in LDS.

The following types built from named barriers are supported in global variables,
defined recursively:

* a standalone ``target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)``
* an array of supported types
* a struct containing a single element of supported type

.. code-block:: llvm

      @bar = addrspace(3) global target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0) undef
      @foo = addrspace(3) global [2 x target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)] undef
      @baz = addrspace(3) global { target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0) } undef

Barrier types may not be used in ``alloca``.

> The integral representation of a pointer to a valid named barrier is in the

Reviewer: > It does actually matter to users if we cop to allowing the use of s.barrier.signal (non-var version) for named barriers. (But maybe the answer is that we just shouldn't do that and instead make sure that s.barrier.signal.var is always good enough?)

Yes please, I would like to keep the GV-backed side of things isolated so the address can be an implementation detail, and we can rediscuss it at a future date.

range ``0x0080'0010`` to ``0x0080'0100`` (inclusive). The representation is
formed by the expression ``0x0080'0000 | (id << 4)``, where ``id`` is the
hardware barrier ID. The integral representation of the null named barrier is
``0x0080'0000``.

> It is not legal to attempt to form a pointer to any non-named barrier objects.

Reviewer 2: For me this just raised more questions than it answered. What is a non-named barrier object and how would I even attempt to form a pointer to one?

                             other operations within the same address space.
     ======================= ===================================================

Target Types
------------

The AMDGPU backend implements some target extension types.

.. _amdgpu-types-named-barriers:

Named Barriers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Named barriers are fixed function hardware barrier objects that are available

> in gfx12.5+ in addition to the traditional default barriers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in gfx12.5+ in addition to workgroup barriers.
```

``target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)`` in the LDS address space. Named barrier
global variables do not occupy actual LDS memory, but their lifetime and
allocation scope matches that of global variables in LDS. Programs in LLVM IR
refer to named barriers using pointers.

The following named barrier types are supported in global variables, defined
recursively:

* a single, standalone ``target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)``
* an array of supported types
* a struct containing a single element of supported type

.. code-block:: llvm

      @bar = addrspace(3) global target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0) undef
      @foo = addrspace(3) global [2 x target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)] undef
      @baz = addrspace(3) global { target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0) } undef

      ...

      %foo.i = getelementptr [2 x target("amdgcn.named.barrier", 0)], ptr addrspace(3) @foo, i32 0, i32 %i
      call void @llvm.amdgcn.s.barrier.signal.var(ptr addrspace(3) %foo.i, i32 0)

Named barrier types may not be used in ``alloca``.

Named barriers do not have an underlying byte representation.
It is undefined behavior to use a pointer to any part of a named barrier object

> as the pointer operand of a regular memory access instruction or intrinsic.

Reviewer: Maybe we need to add something to say the pointer has to be used directly, so cannot be offset (gep) or undergo any kind of manipulation such as inttoptr/ptrtoint?

  better code optimization, at the cost of synchronizing additional address
  spaces.

.. _amdgpu-memory-model-barriers:

> Hardware Barriers

Reviewer: No, not the named barrier parts yet.

forward progress, is undefined behavior. Second, barrier operations can pair
with fences to contribute *synchronizes-with* relations in the memory model.

Roughly speaking:

- Release fences pair with barrier signal operations that are later in program
  order
- Barrier wait operations pair with acquire fences that are later in program
  order
- If a barrier signal operation contributes to allowing a wait operation to
  complete, then the corresponding paired fences can synchronize-with each
  other (given compatible sync scopes and memory model relaxation annotations)

Default Barriers
################

There is a default workgroup barrier and a default cluster barrier. All waves
of a workgroup and cluster are members of the same default workgroup and
cluster barriers, respectively.

.. _amdgpu-memory-model-named-barriers:

Named Barriers
##############

All named barrier operations must occur in wave-uniform control flow. All
arguments of named barrier intrinsics must be wave-uniform.

Named barriers are allocated as global variables of
:ref:`a target extension type <amdgpu-types-named-barriers>`.

Named barriers may be signaled by the intrinsics:

.. code-block:: llvm

>   declare void @llvm.amdgcn.s.barrier.signal(i32 %barrier_hw_id)

Reviewer 2: Should this be `i32 %barrier_type` for consistency with other intrinsics below? (TBH I'm a bit confused about the meaning of the i32 argument, for the intrinsics that don't take a ptr argument.)

Author: They really are different hings. `s.barrier.wait` does not care about the named barrier ID, it only cares about distinguish between named barriers vs. default barriers.
